Networks Intro

Information from https://commotionwireless.net/docs/cck/networking/learn-networking-basics/

Basics
1. Clients and Servers
-How services such as e-mail connect using networks
2. IP addresses
How devices on a network can be found
3. Network hardware
Hubs, switches, cables, etc..
4. Routers and firewalls
How traffic on a network is organised and controlled

1. Clients and Servers
A server is a computer that holds services/content e.g. webpage, chat application
The server that holds google's search page is an example

A client is a different computer, e.g. phone, laptop, that requests to view/download
information, or use content from a server.

A client can connect to a server over a network, to access information.

2. IP addresses
In order to send and direct information over a network, computers need a way to 
identify destinations and origins.
Identification is done using Internet Protocol (IP) addresses. 
An IP address is a set of 4 numbers between 1 and 254, separated by fullstops. E.g 111.102.132.7
Different parts of the IP address provide different location information, like an address.
The first 'section' (i.e. 111 in 111.102.132.7) might explain where in world it is,
whereas the 132 might define a building, and the 7 a single computer in a building.

2.1 Public and Private IP addresses
Public IP addresses are visible to the entire internet
Private IP addresses are not, and are often hidden behind a public IP address

2.2 Task - find my IP address
CL - ip addr show
200~192.168.1.176/24
check on website.. why is it different?
86.175.48.152

because one is private and one is public.

3. Network hubs and switches
Traditionally, computers are connected to one another using cables, usually ethernet cables.
An Ethernet cable has four pairs of wires inside a plastic jacket.
Computer A > hub > Computer B
But with just a hub, all incoming messages are sent to all connected computers

But this can become confusing for the hub when many computers are sending many messages.
So, a switch is used. Now, messages are only sent to intended recipients, not repeated to all.
Limited to sending messages only to the number of ports available on the switch.

4. Routers and firewalls
Routers do majority of 'hard work' on network
They make decisions about messages that travel on network
They decide whether to pass messages from outside/inside
Three main functions:

4a) Separate and Bridge
Separate networks into different sections
Bridge different networks together
E.g private network with internet via public IP adress

4b) Assign IP addresses
E.g 192.168.132.1, new computer added = 192.168.132.2
IP addresses are assigned using Dynamic host configuration protocol (DHCP)

4c) Firewall and protect
Routers can filter messages 
Routers can keep certain people out of private networks
Most routers have an inbuilt firewall - software that prevents certain messages reaching private network
